www.hbr.org
Awareness of the five forces can help a company understand the structure of its industry and stake out a position that is more profitable and less vulnerable to attack.
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategyby Michael E. Porter
Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article:24 Article SummaryThe Idea in Brief—the core ideaThe Idea in Practice—putting the idea to work25 The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy41 Further ReadingA list of related materials, with annotations to guide further exploration of the article’s ideas and applications
Reprint R0801E
The Idea in BriefYou know that to sustain long-term profit-ability you must respond strategically to competition. And you naturally keep tabs
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape StrategyThe Idea in PracticeBy understanding how the five competitive forces influence profitability in your industry, you can develop a strategy for enhancing your company’s long-term profits. Porter suggests the following:
COPYRIGHT © 2008 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
on your established rivals. But as you scan the competitive arena, are you also looking beyond your direct competitors? As Porter explains in this update of his revolutionary 1979 HBR article, four additional competi-tive forces can hurt your prospective profits:• Savvy customers can force down prices by playing you and your rivals against one another.• Powerful suppliers may constrain your profits if they charge higher prices.• Aspiring entrants, armed with new ca-pacity and hungry for market share, can ratchet up the investment required for you to stay in the game.• Substitute offerings can lure customers away.Consider commercial aviation: It’s one of the least profitable industries because all five forces are strong. Established rivals compete intensely on price. Customers are fickle, searching for the best deal regardless of carrier. Suppliers—plane and engine manufacturers, along with unionized labor forces—bargain away the lion’s share of air-lines’ profits. New players enter the indus-try in a constant stream. And substitutes are readily available—such as train or car travel.By analyzing all five competitive forces, you gain a complete picture of what’s influenc-ing profitability in your industry. You iden-tify game-changing trends early, so you can swiftly exploit them. And you spot ways to work around constraints on profitability— or even reshape the forces in your favor.
POSITION YOUR COMPANY WHERE THE FORCES ARE WEAKEST Example:In the heavy-truck industry, many buyers operate large fleets and are highly moti-vated to drive down truck prices. Trucks are built to regulated standards and offer simi-lar features, so price competition is stiff; unions exercise considerable supplier power; and buyers can use substitutes such as cargo delivery by rail.To create and sustain long-term profitability within this industry, heavy-truck maker Pac-car chose to focus on one customer group where competitive forces are weakest: indi-vidual drivers who own their trucks and contract directly with suppliers. These oper-ators have limited clout as buyers and are less price sensitive because of their emo-tional ties to and economic dependence on their own trucks.For these customers, Paccar has developed such features as luxurious sleeper cabins, plush leather seats, and sleek exterior styl-ing. Buyers can select from thousands of options to put their personal signature on these built-to-order trucks.Customers pay Paccar a 10% premium, and the company has been profitable for 68 straight years and earned a long-run return on equity above 20%.
EXPLOIT CHANGES IN THE FORCES  Example:With the advent of the Internet and digital distribution of music, unauthorized down-loading created an illegal but potent substi-tute for record companies’ services. The record companies tried to develop technical platforms for digital distribution themselves, but major labels didn’t want to sell their music through a platform owned by a rival.Into this vacuum stepped Apple, with its iTunes music store supporting its iPod music player. The birth of this powerful new gate-keeper has whittled down the number of major labels from six in 1997 to four today.RESHAPE THE FORCES IN YOUR FAVORUse tactics designed specifically to reduce the share of profits leaking to other players. For example:• To neutralize supplier power, standardize specifications for parts so your company can switch more easily among vendors.• To counter customer power, expand your services so it’s harder for customers to leave you for a rival.• To temper price wars initiated by estab-lished rivals, invest more heavily in prod-ucts that differ significantly from competi-tors’ offerings.• To scare off new entrants, elevate the fixed costs of competing; for instance, by escalat-ing your R&D expenditures.• To limit the threat of substitutes, offer bet-ter value through wider product accessibil-ity. Soft-drink producers did this by intro-ducing vending machines and convenience store channels, which dramat-ically improved the availability of soft drinks relative to other beverages.
page 24
Awareness of the five forces can help a company understand the structure of its industry and stake out a position that is more profitable and less vulnerable to attack.The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategyby Michael E. Porter
COPYRIGHT © 2007 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Editor’s Note: In 1979, Harvard Business Review published “How Competitive Forces Shape Strat-egy” by a young economist and associate profes-sor, Michael E. Porter. It was his first HBR article, and it started a revolution in the strategy field. In subsequent decades, Porter has brought his sig-nature economic rigor to the study of competi-tive strategy for corporations, regions, nations, and, more recently, health care and philanthropy. “Porter’s five forces” have shaped a generation of academic research and business practice. With prodding and assistance from Harvard Business School Professor Jan Rivkin and longtime col-league Joan Magretta, Porter here reaffirms, up-dates, and extends the classic work. He also ad-dresses common misunderstandings, provides practical guidance for users of the framework, and offers a deeper view of its implications for strategy today.In essence, the job of the strategist is to under-stand and cope with competition. Often, how-ever, managers define competition too nar-rowly, as if it occurred only among today’s
direct competitors. Yet competition for profits goes beyond established industry rivals to in-clude four other competitive forces as well: customers, suppliers, potential entrants, and substitute products. The extended rivalry that results from all five forces defines an industry’s structure and shapes the nature of competi-tive interaction within an industry.  As different from one another as industries might appear on the surface, the underlying drivers of profitability are the same. The glo-bal auto industry, for instance, appears to have nothing in common with the worldwide market for art masterpieces or the heavily regulated health-care delivery industry in Eu-rope. But to understand industry competition and profitability in each of those three cases, one must analyze the industry’s underlying structure in terms of the five forces. (See the exhibit “The Five Forces That Shape Industry Competition.”)  If the forces are intense, as they are in such industries as airlines, textiles, and hotels, al-most no company earns attractive returns on
harvard business review • january 2008	page 25
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Michael E. Porter is the Bishop Will-iam Lawrence University Professor at Harvard University, based at Harvard Business School in Boston. He is a six-time McKinsey Award winner, includ-ing for his most recent HBR article, “Strategy and Society,” coauthored with Mark R. Kramer (December 2006).
investment. If the forces are benign, as they are in industries such as software, soft drinks, and toiletries, many companies are profitable. In-dustry structure drives competition and profit-ability, not whether an industry produces a product or service, is emerging or mature, high tech or low tech, regulated or unregulated. While a myriad of factors can affect industry profitability in the short run—including the weather and the business cycle—industry structure, manifested in the competitive forces, sets industry profitability in the medium and long run. (See the exhibit “Differences in In-dustry Profitability.”)  Understanding the competitive forces, and their underlying causes, reveals the roots of an industry’s current profitability while providing a framework for anticipating and influencing competition (and profitability) over time. A healthy industry structure should be as much a competitive concern to strategists as their com-pany’s own position. Understanding industry structure is also essential to effective strategic positioning. As we will see, defending against the competitive forces and shaping them in a company’s favor are crucial to strategy.Forces That Shape CompetitionThe configuration of the five forces differs by industry. In the market for commercial air-craft, fierce rivalry between dominant produc-ers Airbus and Boeing and the bargaining power of the airlines that place huge orders for aircraft are strong, while the threat of en-try, the threat of substitutes, and the power of suppliers are more benign. In the movie the-ater industry, the proliferation of substitute forms of entertainment and the power of the movie producers and distributors who supply movies, the critical input, are important.  The strongest competitive force or forces de-termine the profitability of an industry and be-come the most important to strategy formula-tion. The most salient force, however, is not always obvious.  For example, even though rivalry is often fierce in commodity industries, it may not be the factor limiting profitability. Low returns in the photographic film industry, for instance, are the result of a superior substitute prod-uct—as Kodak and Fuji, the world’s leading producers of photographic film, learned with the advent of digital photography. In such a sit-uation, coping with the substitute product be-
comes the number one strategic priority. Industry structure grows out of a set of eco-nomic and technical characteristics that deter-mine the strength of each competitive force. We will examine these drivers in the pages that follow, taking the perspective of an incumbent, or a company already present in the industry. The analysis can be readily extended to under-stand the challenges facing a potential entrant.  Threat of entry. New entrants to an indus-try bring new capacity and a desire to gain market share that puts pressure on prices, costs, and the rate of investment necessary to compete. Particularly when new entrants are diversifying from other markets, they can le-verage existing capabilities and cash flows to shake up competition, as Pepsi did when it en-tered the bottled water industry, Microsoft did when it began to offer internet browsers, and Apple did when it entered the music distribu-tion business.  The threat of entry, therefore, puts a cap on the profit potential of an industry. When the threat is high, incumbents must hold down their prices or boost investment to deter new competitors. In specialty coffee retailing, for example, relatively low entry barriers mean that Starbucks must invest aggressively in modernizing stores and menus.  The threat of entry in an industry depends on the height of entry barriers that are present and on the reaction entrants can expect from incumbents. If entry barriers are low and new-comers expect little retaliation from the en-trenched competitors, the threat of entry is high and industry profitability is moderated. It is the threat of entry, not whether entry actu-ally occurs, that holds down profitability.  Barriers to entry. Entry barriers are advan-tages that incumbents have relative to new en-trants. There are seven major sources:  1. Supply-side economies of scale. These econ-omies arise when firms that produce at larger volumes enjoy lower costs per unit because they can spread fixed costs over more units, employ more efficient technology, or com-mand better terms from suppliers. Supply-side scale economies deter entry by forcing the aspiring entrant either to come into the industry on a large scale, which requires dis-lodging entrenched competitors, or to accept a cost disadvantage.  Scale economies can be found in virtually every activity in the value chain; which ones
harvard business review • january 2008	page 26
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
are most important varies by industry.1 In mi-croprocessors, incumbents such as Intel are protected by scale economies in research, chip fabrication, and consumer marketing. For lawn care companies like Scotts Miracle-Gro, the most important scale economies are found in the supply chain and media advertising. In small-package delivery, economies of scale arise in national logistical systems and infor-mation technology.  2. Demand-side benefits of scale. These bene-fits, also known as network effects, arise in in-dustries where a buyer’s willingness to pay for a company’s product increases with the num-ber of other buyers who also patronize the company. Buyers may trust larger companies more for a crucial product: Recall the old adage that no one ever got fired for buying from IBM (when it was the dominant com-puter maker). Buyers may also value being in a “network” with a larger number of fellow cus-tomers. For instance, online auction partici-pants are attracted to eBay because it offers the most potential trading partners. Demand-side benefits of scale discourage entry by limit-ing the willingness of customers to buy from a newcomer and by reducing the price the new-comer can command until it builds up a large base of customers.  3. Customer switching costs. Switching costs are fixed costs that buyers face when theyThe Five Forces That Shape Industry Competition
change suppliers. Such costs may arise because a buyer who switches vendors must, for exam-ple, alter product specifications, retrain em-ployees to use a new product, or modify pro-cesses or information systems. The larger the switching costs, the harder it will be for an en-trant to gain customers. Enterprise resource planning (ERP) software is an example of a product with very high switching costs. Once a company has installed SAP’s ERP system, for example, the costs of moving to a new vendor are astronomical because of embedded data, the fact that internal processes have been adapted to SAP, major retraining needs, and the mission-critical nature of the applications.4. Capital requirements. The need to investlarge financial resources in order to competecan deter new entrants. Capital may be neces-sary not only for fixed facilities but also to ex-tend customer credit, build inventories, andfund start-up losses. The barrier is particularlygreat if the capital is required for unrecover-able and therefore harder-to-finance expendi-tures, such as up-front advertising or researchand development. While major corporationshave the financial resources to invade almostany industry, the huge capital requirements incertain fields limit the pool of likely entrants.Conversely, in such fields as tax preparationservices or short-haul trucking, capital require-ments  are  minimal  and  potential  entrantsplentiful.It is important not to overstate the degree towhich capital requirements alone deter entry.If industry returns are attractive and are ex-pected to remain so, and if capital markets areefficient, investors will provide entrants withthe funds they need. For aspiring air carriers,
BargainingPower ofSuppliers
Threatof NewEntrantsRivalryAmongExistingCompetitorsThreat ofSubstituteProducts orServices
BargainingPower ofBuyers
for instance, financing is available to purchaseexpensive aircraft because of their high resalevalue, one reason why there have been numer-ous new airlines in almost every region.5. Incumbency  advantages  independent  ofsize. No matter what their size, incumbentsmay have cost or quality advantages not avail-able to potential rivals. These advantages canstem from such sources as proprietary technol-ogy, preferential access to the best raw mate-rial sources, preemption of the most favorablegeographic locations, established brand identi-ties, or cumulative experience that has allowedincumbents to learn how to produce more effi-ciently. Entrants try to bypass such advantages.Upstart discounters such as Target and Wal-
harvard business review • january 2008	page 27
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Mart, for example, have located stores in free-standing sites rather than regional shopping centers where established department stores were well entrenched.  6. Unequal access to distribution channels. The new entrant must, of course, secure distri-bution of its product or service. A new food item, for example, must displace others from the supermarket shelf via price breaks, promo-tions, intense selling efforts, or some other means. The more limited the wholesale or re-tail channels are and the more that existing competitors have tied them up, the tougher entry into an industry will be. Sometimes ac-cess to distribution is so high a barrier that new entrants must bypass distribution channels al-together or create their own. Thus, upstart low-cost airlines have avoided distribution through travel agents (who tend to favor estab-
lished higher-fare carriers) and have encour-aged passengers to book their own flights on the internet.  7. Restrictive government policy. Government policy can hinder or aid new entry directly, as well as amplify (or nullify) the other entry bar-riers. Government directly limits or even fore-closes entry into industries through, for in-stance, licensing requirements and restrictions on foreign investment. Regulated industries like liquor retailing, taxi services, and airlines are visible examples. Government policy can heighten other entry barriers through such means as expansive patenting rules that pro-tect proprietary technology from imitation or environmental or safety regulations that raise scale economies facing newcomers. Of course, government policies may also make entry eas-ier—directly through subsidies, for instance, or
Differences in Industry ProfitabilityThe average return on invested capital varies markedly from industry to industry. Between 1992 and 2006, for example, average return on in-vested capital in U.S. industries ranged as low as zero or even negative to more than 50%. At the high end are industries like soft drinks and pre-packaged software, which have been almost six times more profitable than the airline industry over the period.Average Return on Invested Capital	Profitability of Selected U.S. Industriesin U.S. Industries, 1992–2006	Average ROIC, 1992–20065010th percentile25thMedian:75th percentile90th percentileSecurity Brokers and Dealers40.9%7.0%percentile14.3%18.6%25.3%Soft Drinks37.6%10.9%Prepackaged Software37.6%40Pharmaceuticals31.7%Perfume, Cosmetics, Toiletries28.6%Advertising Agencies27.3%30Distilled Spirits26.4%IndustriesSemiconductors21.3%Men’s and Boys’ Clothing19.5%Medical Instruments21.0%of20Tires19.5%NumberMalt Beverages19.0%Household Appliances19.2%10Child Day Care Services17.6%Household Furniture17.0%Drug Stores16.5%Grocery Stores16.0%0Iron and Steel Foundries15.6%15.4%0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%Cookies and Crackersor lowerROICor higherMobile Homes15.0%Average industryWine and Brandy13.9%ROIC in the U.S.14.9%Bakery Products13.8%Return on invested capital (ROIC) is the appropriate measureEngines and Turbines13.7%of profitability for strategy formulation, not to mention for equityBook Publishing13.4%investors. Return on sales or the growth rate of profits fail toLaboratory Equipment13.4%account for the capital required to compete in the industry. Here,Oil and Gas Machinery12.6%we utilize earnings before interest and taxes divided by averageSoft Drink Bottling11.7%invested capital less excess cash as the measure of ROIC. ThisKnitting Mills10.5%measure controls for idiosyncratic differences in capital structureHotels10.4%and tax rates across companies and industries.Catalog, Mail-Order Houses5.9%Airlines5.9%Source: Standard & Poor’s, Compustat, and author’s calculations
harvard business review • january 2008	page 28
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
indirectly by funding basic research and mak-ing it available to all firms, new and old, reduc-ing scale economies.  Entry barriers should be assessed relative to the capabilities of potential entrants, which may be start-ups, foreign firms, or companies in related industries. And, as some of our ex-amples illustrate, the strategist must be mind-ful of the creative ways newcomers might find to circumvent apparent barriers.  Expected retaliation. How potential entrants believe incumbents may react will also influ-ence their decision to enter or stay out of anIndustry Analysis in Practice
industry. If reaction is vigorous and protracted enough, the profit potential of participating in the industry can fall below the cost of capital. Incumbents often use public statements and responses to one entrant to send a message to other prospective entrants about their com-mitment to defending market share.  Newcomers are likely to fear expected retali-ation if:•  Incumbents have previously respondedvigorously to new entrants.•  Incumbents possess substantial resourcesto fight back, including excess cash and unusedborrowing power, available productive capac-ity, or clout with distribution channels and cus-tomers.•  Incumbents seem likely to cut prices be-cause they are committed to retaining market
Good industry analysis looks rigor-ously at the structural underpinnings of profitability. A first step is to under-stand the appropriate time horizon.One of the essential tasks in industry analysis is to distinguish temporary or cyclical changes from structural changes. A good guideline for the appro-priate time horizon is the full business cycle for the particular industry. For most industries, a three-to-five-year hori-zon is appropriate, although in some in-dustries with long lead times, such as mining, the appropriate horizon might be a decade or more. It is average profit-ability over this period, not profitability in any particular year, that should be the focus of analysis.  The point of industry analysis is not to declare the industry attractive or un-attractive but to understand the under-pinnings of competition and the root causes of profitability. As much as possi-ble, analysts should look at industry structure quantitatively, rather than be satisfied with lists of qualitative factors. Many elements of the five forces can be quantified: the percentage of the buyer’s total cost accounted for by the industry’s product (to understand buyer price sensi-tivity); the percentage of industry sales required to fill a plant or operate a logisti-cal network of efficient scale (to help as-sess barriers to entry); the buyer’s switch-ing cost (determining the inducement an entrant or rival must offer customers).
  The strength of the competitive forces affects prices, costs, and the in-vestment required to compete; thus the forces are directly tied to the in-come statements and balance sheets of industry participants. Industry struc-ture defines the gap between revenues and costs. For example, intense rivalry drives down prices or elevates the costs of marketing, R&D, or customer service, re-ducing margins. How much? Strong sup-pliers drive up input costs. How much? Buyer power lowers prices or elevates the costs of meeting buyers’ demands, such as the requirement to hold more inven-tory or provide financing. How much? Low barriers to entry or close substitutes limit the level of sustainable prices. How much? It is these economic relationships that sharpen the strategist’s understand-ing of industry competition.  Finally, good industry analysis does not just list pluses and minuses but sees an industry in overall, systemic terms. Which forces are underpinning (or constraining) today’s profitability? How might shifts in one competitive force trigger reactions in others? Answer-ing such questions is often the source of true strategic insights.
share at all costs or because the industry hashigh fixed costs, which create a strong motiva-tion to drop prices to fill excess capacity.•  Industry growth is slow so newcomers cangain volume only by taking it from incumbents.An analysis of barriers to entry and expectedretaliation is obviously crucial for any com-pany contemplating entry into a new industry.The challenge is to find ways to surmount theentry	barriers	without	nullifying,  throughheavy investment, the profitability of partici-pating in the industry.The power of suppliers. Powerful supplierscapture more of the value for themselves bycharging higher prices, limiting quality or ser-vices, or shifting costs to industry participants.Powerful suppliers, including suppliers of la-bor, can squeeze profitability out of an indus-try that is unable to pass on cost increases inits own prices. Microsoft, for instance, has con-tributed to the erosion of profitability amongpersonal computer makers by raising prices onoperating  systems.  PC  makers,  competingfiercely for customers who can easily switchamong them, have limited freedom to raisetheir prices accordingly.Companies depend on a wide range of differ-ent supplier  groups for  inputs. A suppliergroup is powerful if:•  It is more concentrated than the industry itsells to. Microsoft’s near monopoly in operatingsystems, coupled with the fragmentation of PCassemblers, exemplifies this situation.•  The  supplier  group  does  not  dependheavily on the industry for its revenues. Suppli-ers serving many industries will not hesitate to
harvard business review • january 2008	page 29
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Industry structure drives competition and profitability, not whether an industry is emerging or mature, high tech or low tech, regulated or unregulated.
extract maximum profits from each one. If a particular industry accounts for a large portion of a supplier group’s volume or profit, however, suppliers will want to protect the industry through reasonable pricing and assist in activi-ties such as R&D and lobbying.  • Industry participants face switching costs in changing suppliers. For example, shifting suppliers is difficult if companies have invested heavily in specialized ancillary equipment or in learning how to operate a supplier’s equipment (as with Bloomberg terminals used by financial professionals). Or firms may have located their production lines adjacent to a supplier’s manu-facturing facilities (as in the case of some bever-age companies and container manufacturers). When switching costs are high, industry partic-ipants find it hard to play suppliers off against one another. (Note that suppliers may have switching costs as well. This limits their power.)  • Suppliers offer products that are differen-tiated. Pharmaceutical companies that offer patented drugs with distinctive medical bene-fits have more power over hospitals, health maintenance organizations, and other drug buyers, for example, than drug companies of-fering me-too or generic products.  • There is no substitute for what the sup-plier group provides. Pilots’ unions, for exam-ple, exercise considerable supplier power over airlines partly because there is no good alterna-tive to a well-trained pilot in the cockpit.  • The supplier group can credibly threaten to integrate forward into the industry. In that case, if industry participants make too much money relative to suppliers, they will induce suppliers to enter the market.  The power of buyers. Powerful customers— the flip side of powerful suppliers—can cap-ture more value by forcing down prices, de-manding better quality or more service (thereby driving up costs), and generally playing industry participants off against one another, all at the ex-pense of industry profitability. Buyers are power-ful if they have negotiating leverage relative to industry participants, especially if they are price sensitive, using their clout primarily to pressure price reductions.  As with suppliers, there may be distinct groups of customers who differ in bargaining power. A customer group has negotiating le-verage if:  • There are few buyers, or each one pur-chases in volumes that are large relative to the
size of a single vendor. Large-volume buyers are particularly powerful in industries with high fixed costs, such as telecommunications equip-ment, offshore drilling, and bulk chemicals. High fixed costs and low marginal costs amplify the pressure on rivals to keep capacity filled through discounting.  • The industry’s products are standardized or undifferentiated. If buyers believe they can always find an equivalent product, they tend to play one vendor against another.  • Buyers face few switching costs in chang-ing vendors.  • Buyers can credibly threaten to integrate backward and produce the industry’s product themselves if vendors are too profitable. Pro-ducers of soft drinks and beer have long con-trolled the power of packaging manufacturers by threatening to make, and at times actually making, packaging materials themselves.A buyer group is price sensitive if:  • The product it purchases from the indus-try represents a significant fraction of its cost structure or procurement budget. Here buyers are likely to shop around and bargain hard, as consumers do for home mortgages. Where the product sold by an industry is a small fraction of buyers’ costs or expenditures, buyers are usu-ally less price sensitive.  • The buyer group earns low profits, is strapped for cash, or is otherwise under pres-sure to trim its purchasing costs. Highly profit-able or cash-rich customers, in contrast, are generally less price sensitive (that is, of course, if the item does not represent a large fraction of their costs).  • The quality of buyers’ products or services is little affected by the industry’s product. Where quality is very much affected by the in-dustry’s product, buyers are generally less price sensitive. When purchasing or renting produc-tion quality cameras, for instance, makers of major motion pictures opt for highly reliable equipment with the latest features. They pay limited attention to price.  • The industry’s product has little effect on the buyer’s other costs. Here, buyers focus on price. Conversely, where an industry’s product or service can pay for itself many times over by improving performance or reducing labor, ma-terial, or other costs, buyers are usually more interested in quality than in price. Examples in-clude products and services like tax accounting or well logging (which measures below-ground
harvard business review • january 2008	page 30
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategyconditions of oil wells) that can save or eventhreatened when airline and travel websitesmake the buyer money. Similarly, buyers tendsubstitute for travel agents.not to be price sensitive in services such as in-Substitutes are always present, but they arevestment banking, where poor performanceeasy to overlook because they may appear tocan be costly and embarrassing.be very different from the industry’s product:Most sources of buyer power apply equallyTo someone searching for a Father’s Day gift,to consumers and to business-to-business cus-neckties and power tools may be substitutes. Ittomers. Like industrial customers, consumersis a substitute to do without, to purchase atend to be more price sensitive if they are pur-used product rather than a new one, or to do itchasing products that are undifferentiated, ex-yourself  (bring  the  service  or  product  in-pensive relative to their incomes, and of a sorthouse).where product performance has limited conse-When the threat of substitutes is high, indus-quences. The major difference with consum-try profitability suffers. Substitute products orers is that their needs can be more intangibleservices limit an industry’s profit potential byand harder to quantify.placing a ceiling on prices. If an industry doesIntermediate customers, or customers whonot distance itself from substitutes throughpurchase the product but are not the end userproduct  performance,  marketing,  or  other(such as assemblers or distribution channels),means, it will suffer in terms of profitability—can be analyzed the same way as other buyers,and often growth potential.with  one  important  addition. IntermediateSubstitutes not only limit profits in normalcustomers gain significant bargaining powertimes, they also reduce the bonanza an indus-when they can influence the purchasing deci-try can reap in good times. In emerging econo-sions  of  customers  downstream. Consumermies, for example, the surge in demand forelectronics retailers, jewelry retailers, and agri-wired telephone lines has been capped ascultural-equipment distributors are examplesmany consumers opt to make a mobile tele-of distribution channels that exert a strong in-phone their first and only phone line.fluence on end customers.The threat of a substitute is high if:Producers often attempt to diminish chan-•  It offers an attractive price-performancenel clout through exclusive arrangements withtrade-off to the industry’s product. The betterparticular distributors or retailers or by mar-the relative value of the substitute, the tighterketing directly to end users. Component manu-is the lid on an industry’s profit potential. Forfacturers seek to develop power over assem-example, conventional providers of long-dis-blers  by  creating  preferences  for  theirtance telephone service have suffered from thecomponents  with  downstreamcustomers.advent of inexpensive internet-based phoneSuch is the case with bicycle parts and withservices such as Vonage and Skype. Similarly,sweeteners. DuPont  has  created  enormousvideo rental outlets are struggling with theclout by advertising its Stainmaster brand ofemergence of cable and satellite video-on-de-carpet fibers not only to the carpet manufac-mand services, online video rental services suchturers that actually buy them but also to down-as Netflix, and the rise of internet video sitesstream consumers. Many consumers requestlike Google’s YouTube.Stainmaster carpet even though DuPont is not•  The buyer’s cost of switching to the substi-a carpet manufacturer.tute  is  low. Switching  from  a  proprietary,The threat of substitutes. A substitute per-branded drug to a generic drug usually involvesforms the same or a similar function as an in-minimal costs, for example, which is why thedustry’s product by a different means. Video-shift to generics (and the fall in prices) is so sub-conferencing is a substitute for travel. Plastic isstantial and rapid.a substitute for aluminum. E-mail is a substi-Strategists should be particularly alert totute for express mail. Sometimes, the threat ofchanges in other industries that may makesubstitution is downstream or indirect, when athem attractive substitutes when they were notsubstitute replaces a buyer industry’s product.before. Improvements in plastic materials, forFor example, lawn-care products and servicesexample, allowed them to substitute for steelare threatened when multifamily homes inin many automobile components. In this way,urban areas substitute for single-family homestechnological changes or competitive disconti-in the suburbs. Software sold toagents isnuities in seemingly unrelated businesses can
harvard business review • january 2008	page 31
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Rivalry is especially destructive to profitability if it gravitates solely to price because price competition transfers profits directly from an industry to its customers.
have major impacts on industry profitability. Of course the substitution threat can also shift in favor of an industry, which bodes well for its future profitability and growth potential.  Rivalry among existing competitors. Rivalry among existing competitors takes many famil-iar forms, including price discounting, new product introductions, advertising campaigns, and service improvements. High rivalry limits the profitability of an industry. The degree to which rivalry drives down an industry’s profit potential depends, first, on the intensity with which companies compete and, second, on the basis on which they compete.The intensity of rivalry is greatest if:  • Competitors are numerous or are roughly equal in size and power. In such situations, ri-vals find it hard to avoid poaching business. Without an industry leader, practices desirable for the industry as a whole go unenforced.  • Industry growth is slow. Slow growth pre-cipitates fights for market share.  • Exit barriers are high. Exit barriers, the flip side of entry barriers, arise because of such things as highly specialized assets or manage-ment’s devotion to a particular business. These barriers keep companies in the market even though they may be earning low or negative re-turns. Excess capacity remains in use, and the profitability of healthy competitors suffers as the sick ones hang on.  • Rivals are highly committed to the busi-ness and have aspirations for leadership, espe-cially if they have goals that go beyond eco-nomic performance in the particular industry. High commitment to a business arises for a va-riety of reasons. For example, state-owned com-petitors may have goals that include employ-ment or prestige. Units of larger companies may participate in an industry for image rea-sons or to offer a full line. Clashes of personality and ego have sometimes exaggerated rivalry to the detriment of profitability in fields such as the media and high technology.  • Firms cannot read each other’s signals well because of lack of familiarity with one another, diverse approaches to competing, or differing goals.  The strength of rivalry reflects not just the intensity of competition but also the basis of competition. The dimensions on which compe-tition takes place, and whether rivals converge to compete on the same dimensions, have a major influence on profitability.
  Rivalry is especially destructive to profitabil-ity if it gravitates solely to price because price competition transfers profits directly from an industry to its customers. Price cuts are usually easy for competitors to see and match, making successive rounds of retaliation likely. Sus-tained price competition also trains customers to pay less attention to product features and service.Price competition is most liable to occur if:  • Products or services of rivals are nearly identical and there are few switching costs for buyers. This encourages competitors to cut prices to win new customers. Years of airline price wars reflect these circumstances in that industry.  • Fixed costs are high and marginal costs are low. This creates intense pressure for competi-tors to cut prices below their average costs, even close to their marginal costs, to steal incre-mental customers while still making some con-tribution to covering fixed costs. Many basic-materials businesses, such as paper and alumi-num, suffer from this problem, especially if de-mand is not growing. So do delivery companies with fixed networks of routes that must be served regardless of volume.  • Capacity must be expanded in large incre-ments to be efficient. The need for large capac-ity expansions, as in the polyvinyl chloride busi-ness, disrupts the industry’s supply-demand balance and often leads to long and recurring periods of overcapacity and price cutting.  • The product is perishable. Perishability creates a strong temptation to cut prices and sell a product while it still has value. More prod-ucts and services are perishable than is com-monly thought. Just as tomatoes are perishable because they rot, models of computers are per-ishable because they soon become obsolete, and information may be perishable if it diffuses rapidly or becomes outdated, thereby losing its value. Services such as hotel accommodations are perishable in the sense that unused capacity can never be recovered.  Competition on dimensions other than price—on product features, support services, delivery time, or brand image, for instance—is less likely to erode profitability because it im-proves customer value and can support higher prices. Also, rivalry focused on such dimen-sions can improve value relative to substitutes or raise the barriers facing new entrants. While nonprice rivalry sometimes escalates to levels
harvard business review • january 2008	page 32
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
that undermine industry profitability, this is less likely to occur than it is with price rivalry.  As important as the dimensions of rivalry is whether rivals compete on the same dimen-sions. When all or many competitors aim to meet the same needs or compete on the same attributes, the result is zero-sum competition. Here, one firm’s gain is often another’s loss, driving down profitability. While price compe-tition runs a stronger risk than nonprice com-petition of becoming zero sum, this may not happen if companies take care to segment their markets, targeting their low-price offer-ings to different customers.  Rivalry can be positive sum, or actually in-crease the average profitability of an industry, when each competitor aims to serve the needs of different customer segments, with different mixes of price, products, services, features, or brand identities. Such competition can not only support higher average profitability but also expand the industry, as the needs of more customer groups are better met. The opportu-nity for positive-sum competition will be greater in industries serving diverse customer groups. With a clear understanding of the structural underpinnings of rivalry, strategists can sometimes take steps to shift the nature of competition in a more positive direction.Factors, Not ForcesIndustry structure, as manifested in the strength of the five competitive forces, deter-mines the industry’s long-run profit potential because it determines how the economic value created by the industry is divided—how much is retained by companies in the industry versus bargained away by customers and sup-pliers, limited by substitutes, or constrained by potential new entrants. By considering all five forces, a strategist keeps overall structure in mind instead of gravitating to any one ele-ment. In addition, the strategist’s attention re-mains focused on structural conditions rather than on fleeting factors.  It is especially important to avoid the com-mon pitfall of mistaking certain visible at-tributes of an industry for its underlying struc-ture. Consider the following:  Industry growth rate. A common mistake is to assume that fast-growing industries are al-ways attractive. Growth does tend to mute ri-valry, because an expanding pie offers oppor-tunities for all competitors. But fast growth
can put suppliers in a powerful position, and high growth with low entry barriers will draw in entrants. Even without new entrants, a high growth rate will not guarantee profitability if customers are powerful or substitutes are at-tractive. Indeed, some fast-growth businesses, such as personal computers, have been among the least profitable industries in recent years. A narrow focus on growth is one of the major causes of bad strategy decisions.  Technology and innovation. Advanced tech-nology or innovations are not by themselves enough to make an industry structurally at-tractive (or unattractive). Mundane, low-tech-nology industries with price-insensitive buy-ers, high switching costs, or high entry barriers arising from scale economies are often far more profitable than sexy industries, such as software and internet technologies, that at-tract competitors.2  Government. Government is not best un-derstood as a sixth force because government involvement is neither inherently good nor bad for industry profitability. The best way to understand the influence of government on competition is to analyze how specific govern-ment policies affect the five competitive forces. For instance, patents raise barriers to entry, boosting industry profit potential. Con-versely, government policies favoring unions may raise supplier power and diminish profit potential. Bankruptcy rules that allow failing companies to reorganize rather than exit can lead to excess capacity and intense rivalry. Government operates at multiple levels and through many different policies, each of which will affect structure in different ways.Complementary products and services.Complements are products or services used to-gether with an industry’s product. Comple-ments arise when the customer benefit of two products combined is greater than the sum of each product’s value in isolation. Computer hardware and software, for instance, are valu-able together and worthless when separated.  In recent years, strategy researchers have highlighted the role of complements, espe-cially in high-technology industries where they are most obvious.3 By no means, however, do complements appear only there. The value of a car, for example, is greater when the driver also has access to gasoline stations, roadside assis-tance, and auto insurance.Complements can be important when they
harvard business review • january 2008	page 33
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
affect the overall demand for an industry’s product. However, like government policy, complements are not a sixth force determining industry profitability since the presence of strong complements is not necessarily bad (or good) for industry profitability. Complements affect profitability through the way they influ-ence the five forces.  The strategist must trace the positive or neg-ative influence of complements on all five forces to ascertain their impact on profitability. The presence of complements can raise or lower barriers to entry. In application software, for example, barriers to entry were lowered when producers of complementary operating system software, notably Microsoft, provided tool sets making it easier to write applications. Conversely, the need to attract producers of complements can raise barriers to entry, as it does in video game hardware.  The presence of complements can also affect the threat of substitutes. For instance, the need for appropriate fueling stations makes it diffi-cult for cars using alternative fuels to substi-tute for conventional vehicles. But comple-ments can also make substitution easier. For example, Apple’s iTunes hastened the substitu-tion from CDs to digital music.  Complements can factor into industry ri-valry either positively (as when they raise switching costs) or negatively (as when they neutralize product differentiation). Similar analyses can be done for buyer and supplier power. Sometimes companies compete by al-tering conditions in complementary industries in their favor, such as when videocassette-re-corder producer JVC persuaded movie studios to favor its standard in issuing prerecorded tapes even though rival Sony’s standard was probably superior from a technical standpoint.  Identifying complements is part of the ana-lyst’s work. As with government policies or im-portant technologies, the strategic significance of complements will be best understood through the lens of the five forces.Changes in Industry StructureSo far, we have discussed the competitive forces at a single point in time. Industry struc-ture proves to be relatively stable, and indus-try profitability differences are remarkably persistent over time in practice. However, in-dustry structure is constantly undergoing modest adjustment—and occasionally it can
change abruptly.  Shifts in structure may emanate from out-side an industry or from within. They can boost the industry’s profit potential or reduce it. They may be caused by changes in technol-ogy, changes in customer needs, or other events. The five competitive forces provide a framework for identifying the most important industry developments and for anticipating their impact on industry attractiveness.  Shifting threat of new entry. Changes to any of the seven barriers described above can raise or lower the threat of new entry. The expira-tion of a patent, for instance, may unleash new entrants. On the day that Merck’s patents for the cholesterol reducer Zocor expired, three pharmaceutical makers entered the market for the drug. Conversely, the proliferation of products in the ice cream industry has gradu-ally filled up the limited freezer space in gro-cery stores, making it harder for new ice cream makers to gain access to distribution in North America and Europe.  Strategic decisions of leading competitors often have a major impact on the threat of en-try. Starting in the 1970s, for example, retailers such as Wal-Mart, Kmart, and Toys “R” Us began to adopt new procurement, distribution, and inventory control technologies with large fixed costs, including automated distribution centers, bar coding, and point-of-sale termi-nals. These investments increased the econo-mies of scale and made it more difficult for small retailers to enter the business (and for ex-isting small players to survive).  Changing supplier or buyer power. As the factors underlying the power of suppliers and buyers change with time, their clout rises or declines. In the global appliance industry, for instance, competitors including Electrolux, General Electric, and Whirlpool have been squeezed by the consolidation of retail chan-nels (the decline of appliance specialty stores, for instance, and the rise of big-box retailers like Best Buy and Home Depot in the United States). Another example is travel agents, who depend on airlines as a key supplier. When the internet allowed airlines to sell tickets directly to customers, this significantly increased their power to bargain down agents’ commissions.  Shifting threat of substitution. The most com-mon reason substitutes become more or less threatening over time is that advances in tech-nology create new substitutes or shift price-
harvard business review • january 2008	page 34
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Eliminating rivals is a risky strategy. A profit windfall from removing today’s competitors often attracts new competitors and backlash from customers and suppliers.
performance comparisons in one direction or the other. The earliest microwave ovens, for example, were large and priced above $2,000, making them poor substitutes for conven-tional ovens. With technological advances, they became serious substitutes. Flash com-puter memory has improved enough recently to become a meaningful substitute for low-ca-pacity hard-disk drives. Trends in the availabil-ity or performance of complementary produc-ers also shift the threat of substitutes.  New bases of rivalry. Rivalry often intensi-fies naturally over time. As an industry ma-tures, growth slows. Competitors become more alike as industry conventions emerge, technology diffuses, and consumer tastes con-verge. Industry profitability falls, and weaker competitors are driven from the business. This story has played out in industry after industry; televisions, snowmobiles, and telecommunica-tions equipment are just a few examples.  A trend toward intensifying price competi-tion and other forms of rivalry, however, is by no means inevitable. For example, there has been enormous competitive activity in the U.S. casino industry in recent decades, but most of it has been positive-sum competition directed toward new niches and geographic segments (such as riverboats, trophy properties, Native American reservations, international expan-sion, and novel customer groups like families). Head-to-head rivalry that lowers prices or boosts the payouts to winners has been lim-ited.  The nature of rivalry in an industry is al-tered by mergers and acquisitions that intro-duce new capabilities and ways of competing. Or, technological innovation can reshape ri-valry. In the retail brokerage industry, the ad-vent of the internet lowered marginal costs and reduced differentiation, triggering far more intense competition on commissions and fees than in the past.  In some industries, companies turn to merg-ers and consolidation not to improve cost and quality but to attempt to stop intense competi-tion. Eliminating rivals is a risky strategy, how-ever. The five competitive forces tell us that a profit windfall from removing today’s competi-tors often attracts new competitors and back-lash from customers and suppliers. In New York banking, for example, the 1980s and 1990s saw escalating consolidations of commercial and savings banks, including Manufacturers
Hanover, Chemical, Chase, and Dime Savings. But today the retail-banking landscape of Man-hattan is as diverse as ever, as new entrants such as Wachovia, Bank of America, and Wash-ington Mutual have entered the market.Implications for StrategyUnderstanding the forces that shape industry competition is the starting point for develop-ing strategy. Every company should already know what the average profitability of its in-dustry is and how that has been changing over time. The five forces reveal why industry prof-itability is what it is. Only then can a company incorporate industry conditions into strategy.  The forces reveal the most significant aspects of the competitive environment. They also pro-vide a baseline for sizing up a company’s strengths and weaknesses: Where does the company stand versus buyers, suppliers, en-trants, rivals, and substitutes? Most impor-tantly, an understanding of industry structure guides managers toward fruitful possibilities for strategic action, which may include any or all of the following: positioning the company to better cope with the current competitive forces; anticipating and exploiting shifts in the forces; and shaping the balance of forces to cre-ate a new industry structure that is more favor-able to the company. The best strategies ex-ploit more than one of these possibilities.  Positioning the company. Strategy can be viewed as building defenses against the com-petitive forces or finding a position in the in-dustry where the forces are weakest. Consider, for instance, the position of Paccar in the mar-ket for heavy trucks. The heavy-truck industry is structurally challenging. Many buyers oper-ate large fleets or are large leasing companies, with both the leverage and the motivation to drive down the price of one of their largest purchases. Most trucks are built to regulated standards and offer similar features, so price competition is rampant. Capital intensity causes rivalry to be fierce, especially during the recurring cyclical downturns. Unions exer-cise considerable supplier power. Though there are few direct substitutes for an 18-wheeler, truck buyers face important substi-tutes for their services, such as cargo delivery by rail.  In this setting, Paccar, a Bellevue, Washing-ton–based company with about 20% of the North American heavy-truck market, has cho-
harvard business review • january 2008	page 35
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Using the five forces framework, creative strategists may be able to spot an industry with a good future before this good future is reflected in the prices of acquisition candidates.
sen to focus on one group of customers: owner-operators—drivers who own their trucks and contract directly with shippers or serve as sub-contractors to larger trucking companies. Such small operators have limited clout as truck buyers. They are also less price sensitive be-cause of their strong emotional ties to and eco-nomic dependence on the product. They take great pride in their trucks, in which they spend most of their time.  Paccar has invested heavily to develop an array of features with owner-operators in mind: luxurious sleeper cabins, plush leather seats, noise-insulated cabins, sleek exterior styl-ing, and so on. At the company’s extensive net-work of dealers, prospective buyers use soft-ware to select among thousands of options to put their personal signature on their trucks. These customized trucks are built to order, not to stock, and delivered in six to eight weeks. Paccar’s trucks also have aerodynamic designs that reduce fuel consumption, and they main-tain their resale value better than other trucks. Paccar’s roadside assistance program and IT-supported system for distributing spare parts reduce the time a truck is out of service. All these are crucial considerations for an owner-operator. Customers pay Paccar a 10% pre-mium, and its Kenworth and Peterbilt brands are considered status symbols at truck stops.  Paccar illustrates the principles of position-ing a company within a given industry struc-ture. The firm has found a portion of its indus-try where the competitive forces are weaker— where it can avoid buyer power and price-based rivalry. And it has tailored every single part of the value chain to cope well with the forces in its segment. As a result, Paccar has been profitable for 68 years straight and has earned a long-run return on equity above 20%.  In addition to revealing positioning opportu-nities within an existing industry, the five forces framework allows companies to rigor-ously analyze entry and exit. Both depend on answering the difficult question: “What is the potential of this business?” Exit is indicated when industry structure is poor or declining and the company has no prospect of a superior positioning. In considering entry into a new in-dustry, creative strategists can use the frame-work to spot an industry with a good future before this good future is reflected in the prices of acquisition candidates. Five forces analysis may also reveal industries that are not
necessarily attractive for the average entrant but in which a company has good reason to be-lieve it can surmount entry barriers at lower cost than most firms or has a unique ability to cope with the industry’s competitive forces.  Exploiting industry change. Industry changes bring the opportunity to spot and claim prom-ising new strategic positions if the strategist has a sophisticated understanding of the com-petitive forces and their underpinnings. Con-sider, for instance, the evolution of the music industry during the past decade. With the ad-vent of the internet and the digital distribu-tion of music, some analysts predicted the birth of thousands of music labels (that is, record companies that develop artists and bring their music to market). This, the analysts argued, would break a pattern that had held since Edison invented the phonograph: Be-tween three and six major record companies had always dominated the industry. The inter-net would, they predicted, remove distribu-tion as a barrier to entry, unleashing a flood of new players into the music industry.  A careful analysis, however, would have re-vealed that physical distribution was not the crucial barrier to entry. Rather, entry was barred by other benefits that large music labels enjoyed. Large labels could pool the risks of de-veloping new artists over many bets, cushion-ing the impact of inevitable failures. Even more important, they had advantages in break-ing through the clutter and getting their new artists heard. To do so, they could promise radio stations and record stores access to well-known artists in exchange for promotion of new artists. New labels would find this nearly impossible to match. The major labels stayed the course, and new music labels have been rare.  This is not to say that the music industry is structurally unchanged by digital distribution. Unauthorized downloading created an illegal but potent substitute. The labels tried for years to develop technical platforms for digital distri-bution themselves, but major companies hesi-tated to sell their music through a platform owned by a rival. Into this vacuum stepped Apple with its iTunes music store, launched in 2003 to support its iPod music player. By per-mitting the creation of a powerful new gate-keeper, the major labels allowed industry structure to shift against them. The number of major record companies has actually de-
harvard business review • january 2008	page 36
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
clined—from six in 1997 to four today—as companies struggled to cope with the digital phenomenon.  When industry structure is in flux, new and promising competitive positions may appear. Structural changes open up new needs and new ways to serve existing needs. Established leaders may overlook these or be constrained by past strategies from pursuing them. Smaller competitors in the industry can capitalize on such changes, or the void may well be filled by new entrants.  Shaping industry structure. When a com-pany exploits structural change, it is recogniz-ing, and reacting to, the inevitable. However, companies also have the ability to shape in-dustry structure. A firm can lead its industry toward new ways of competing that alter the five forces for the better. In reshaping struc-
ture, a company wants its competitors to fol-low so that the entire industry will be trans-formed. While many industry participants may benefit in the process, the innovator can benefit most if it can shift competition in di-rections where it can excel.  An industry’s structure can be reshaped in two ways: by redividing profitability in favor of incumbents or by expanding the overall profit pool. Redividing the industry pie aims to in-crease the share of profits to industry competi-tors instead of to suppliers, buyers, substitutes, and keeping out potential entrants. Expanding the profit pool involves increasing the overall pool of economic value generated by the in-dustry in which rivals, buyers, and suppliers can all share.  Redividing profitability. To capture more pro-fits for industry rivals, the starting point is to
Defining the Relevant Industry
Defining the industry in which competition actually takes place is important for good in-dustry analysis, not to mention for develop-ing strategy and setting business unit bound-aries. Many strategy errors emanate from mistaking the relevant industry, defining it too broadly or too narrowly. Defining the in-dustry too broadly obscures differences among products, customers, or geographic regions that are important to competition, strategic positioning, and profitability. Defin-ing the industry too narrowly overlooks com-monalities and linkages across related prod-ucts or geographic markets that are crucial to competitive advantage. Also, strategists must be sensitive to the possibility that industry boundaries can shift.  The boundaries of an industry consist of two primary dimensions. First is the scope of products or services. For example, is motor oil used in cars part of the same industry as motor oil used in heavy trucks and stationary engines, or are these different industries? The second dimension is geographic scope. Most industries are present in many parts of the world. However, is competition contained within each state, or is it national? Does com-petition take place within regions such as Eu-rope or North America, or is there a single glo-bal industry?The five forces are the basic tool to resolve
these questions. If industry structure for two products is the same or very similar (that is, if they have the same buyers, suppliers, barriers to entry, and so forth), then the products are best treated as being part of the same indus-try. If industry structure differs markedly, how-ever, the two products may be best under-stood as separate industries.  In lubricants, the oil used in cars is similar or even identical to the oil used in trucks, but the similarity largely ends there. Automotive motor oil is sold to fragmented, generally un-sophisticated customers through numerous and often powerful channels, using extensive advertising. Products are packaged in small containers and logistical costs are high, neces-sitating local production. Truck and power generation lubricants are sold to entirely dif-ferent buyers in entirely different ways using a separate supply chain. Industry structure (buyer power, barriers to entry, and so forth) is substantially different. Automotive oil is thus a distinct industry from oil for truck and station-ary engine uses. Industry profitability will dif-fer in these two cases, and a lubricant com-pany will need a separate strategy for competing in each area.  Differences in the five competitive forces also reveal the geographic scope of competi-tion. If an industry has a similar structure in every country (rivals, buyers, and so on), the
presumption is that competition is global, and the five forces analyzed from a global perspec-tive will set average profitability. A single glo-bal strategy is needed. If an industry has quite different structures in different geographic re-gions, however, each region may well be a dis-tinct industry. Otherwise, competition would have leveled the differences. The five forces an-alyzed for each region will set profitability there.  The extent of differences in the five forces for related products or across geographic areas is a matter of degree, making industry definition often a matter of judgment. A rule of thumb is that where the differences in any one force are large, and where the differences involve more than one force, distinct indus-tries may well be present.  Fortunately, however, even if industry boundaries are drawn incorrectly, careful five forces analysis should reveal important com-petitive threats. A closely related product omitted from the industry definition will show up as a substitute, for example, or competitors overlooked as rivals will be recognized as po-tential entrants. At the same time, the five forces analysis should reveal major differences within overly broad industries that will indi-cate the need to adjust industry boundaries or strategies.
harvard business review • january 2008	page 37
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
determine which force or forces are currently constraining industry profitability and address them. A company can potentially influence all of the competitive forces. The strategist’s goal here is to reduce the share of profits that leak to suppliers, buyers, and substitutes or are sac-rificed to deter entrants.  To neutralize supplier power, for example, a firm can standardize specifications for parts to make it easier to switch among suppliers. It can cultivate additional vendors, or alter tech-nology to avoid a powerful supplier group alto-gether. To counter customer power, companies may expand services that raise buyers’ switch-ing costs or find alternative means of reaching customers to neutralize powerful channels. To temper profit-eroding price rivalry, companies can invest more heavily in unique products, as pharmaceutical firms have done, or expand support services to customers. To scare off en-trants, incumbents can elevate the fixed cost of competing—for instance, by escalating their R&D or marketing expenditures. To limit the threat of substitutes, companies can offer bet-ter value through new features or wider prod-uct accessibility. When soft-drink producers in-troduced vending machines and convenience store channels, for example, they dramatically improved the availability of soft drinks relativeTypical Steps in Industry Analysis
to other beverages.  Sysco, the largest food-service distributor in North America, offers a revealing example of how an industry leader can change the struc-ture of an industry for the better. Food-service distributors purchase food and related items from farmers and food processors. They then warehouse and deliver these items to restau-rants, hospitals, employer cafeterias, schools, and other food-service institutions. Given low barriers to entry, the food-service distribution industry has historically been highly frag-mented, with numerous local competitors. While rivals try to cultivate customer relation-ships, buyers are price sensitive because food represents a large share of their costs. Buyers can also choose the substitute approaches of purchasing directly from manufacturers or using retail sources, avoiding distributors alto-gether. Suppliers wield bargaining power: They are often large companies with strong brand names that food preparers and consum-ers recognize. Average profitability in the in-dustry has been modest.  Sysco recognized that, given its size and na-tional reach, it might change this state of af-fairs. It led the move to introduce private-label distributor brands with specifications tailored to the food-service market, moderating sup-plier power. Sysco emphasized value-added services to buyers such as credit, menu plan-ning, and inventory management to shift the basis of competition away from just price. These moves, together with stepped-up invest-
Define the relevant industry:• What products are in it? Which ones are part of another distinct indus-try?• What is the geographic scope of competition?Identify the participants and segment them into groups, if appropriate:Who are• the buyers and buyer groups?• the suppliers and supplier groups?• the competitors?• the substitutes?• the potential entrants?Assess the underlying drivers of each competitive force to determine which forces are strong and which are weak and why.
Determine overall industry structure, and test the analysis for consistency:• Why is the level of profitability what it is?• Which are the controlling forces for profitability?• Is the industry analysis consistent with actual long-run profitability?• Are more-profitable players better positioned in relation to the five forces?Analyze recent and likely future changes in each force, both positive and negative.Identify aspects of industry structure that might be influenced by competitors, by new entrants, or by your company.
ments in information technology and regional distribution centers, substantially raised the bar for new entrants while making the substi-tutes less attractive. Not surprisingly, the in-dustry has been consolidating, and industry profitability appears to be rising.  Industry leaders have a special responsibility for improving industry structure. Doing so often requires resources that only large players possess. Moreover, an improved industry struc-ture is a public good because it benefits every firm in the industry, not just the company that initiated the improvement. Often, it is more in the interests of an industry leader than any other participant to invest for the common good because leaders will usually benefit the most. Indeed, improving the industry may be a leader’s most profitable strategic opportunity, in part because attempts to gain further mar-ket share can trigger strong reactions from ri-
harvard business review • january 2008	page 38
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
Common PitfallsIn conducting the analysis avoid the following common mistakes:• Defining the industry too broadly or too narrowly.• Making lists instead of engaging in rigorous analysis.• Paying equal attention to all of the forces rather than digging deeply into the most important ones.• Confusing effect (price sensitiv-ity) with cause (buyer econom-ics).• Using static analysis that ignores industry trends.• Confusing cyclical or transient changes with true structural changes.• Using the framework to declare an industry attractive or unat-tractive rather than using it to guide strategic choices.
vals, customers, and even suppliers.  There is a dark side to shaping industry structure that is equally important to under-stand. Ill-advised changes in competitive posi-tioning and operating practices can undermine industry structure. Faced with pressures to gain market share or enamored with innova-tion for its own sake, managers may trigger new kinds of competition that no incumbent can win. When taking actions to improve their own company’s competitive advantage, then, strategists should ask whether they are setting in motion dynamics that will undermine indus-try structure in the long run. In the early days of the personal computer industry, for in-stance, IBM tried to make up for its late entry by offering an open architecture that would set industry standards and attract complementary makers of application software and peripher-als. In the process, it ceded ownership of the critical components of the PC—the operating system and the microprocessor—to Microsoft and Intel. By standardizing PCs, it encouraged price-based rivalry and shifted power to suppli-ers. Consequently, IBM became the tempo-rarily dominant firm in an industry with an en-duringly unattractive structure.  Expanding the profit pool. When overall de-mand grows, the industry’s quality level rises, intrinsic costs are reduced, or waste is elimi-nated, the pie expands. The total pool of value available to competitors, suppliers, and buyers grows. The total profit pool expands, for exam-ple, when channels become more competitive or when an industry discovers latent buyers for its product that are not currently being served. When soft-drink producers rational-ized their independent bottler networks to make them more efficient and effective, both the soft-drink companies and the bottlers ben-efited. Overall value can also expand when firms work collaboratively with suppliers to improve coordination and limit unnecessary costs incurred in the supply chain. This lowers the inherent cost structure of the industry, al-lowing higher profit, greater demand through lower prices, or both. Or, agreeing on quality standards can bring up industrywide quality and service levels, and hence prices, benefiting rivals, suppliers, and customers.  Expanding the overall profit pool creates win-win opportunities for multiple industry participants. It can also reduce the risk of de-structive rivalry that arises when incumbents
attempt to shift bargaining power or capture more market share. However, expanding the pie does not reduce the importance of industry structure. How the expanded pie is divided will ultimately be determined by the five forces. The most successful companies are those that expand the industry profit pool in ways that allow them to share disproportionately in the benefits.  Defining the industry. The five competitive forces also hold the key to defining the rele-vant industry (or industries) in which a com-pany competes. Drawing industry boundaries correctly, around the arena in which competi-tion actually takes place, will clarify the causes of profitability and the appropriate unit for setting strategy. A company needs a separate strategy for each distinct industry. Mistakes in industry definition made by competitors present opportunities for staking out superior strategic positions. (See the sidebar “Defining the Relevant Industry.”)Competition and ValueThe competitive forces reveal the drivers of in-dustry competition. A company strategist who understands that competition extends well be-yond existing rivals will detect wider competi-tive threats and be better equipped to address them. At the same time, thinking comprehen-sively about an industry’s structure can un-cover opportunities: differences in customers, suppliers, substitutes, potential entrants, and rivals that can become the basis for distinct strategies yielding superior performance. In a world of more open competition and relent-less change, it is more important than ever to think structurally about competition.Understanding industry structure is equally important for investors as for managers. The five competitive forces reveal whether an in-dustry is truly attractive, and they help inves-tors anticipate positive or negative shifts in in-dustry structure before they are obvious. The five forces distinguish short-term blips from structural changes and allow investors to take advantage of undue pessimism or optimism. Those companies whose strategies have indus-try-transforming potential become far clearer. This deeper thinking about competition is a more powerful way to achieve genuine invest-ment success than the financial projections and trend extrapolation that dominate today’s investment analysis.
harvard business review • january 2008	page 39
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy
  If both executives and investors looked at competition this way, capital markets would be a far more effective force for company success and economic prosperity. Executives and inves-tors would both be focused on the same funda-mentals that drive sustained profitability. The conversation between investors and execu-tives would focus on the structural, not the transient. Imagine the improvement in com-pany performance—and in the economy as a whole—if all the energy expended in “pleasing the Street” were redirected toward the factors that create true economic value.
1. For a discussion of the value chain framework, see Michael E. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sus-taining Superior Performance (The Free Press, 1998).2. For a discussion of how internet technology improves the attractiveness of some industries while eroding the profit-ability of others, see Michael E. Porter, “Strategy and the Internet” (HBR, March 2001).3. See, for instance, Adam M. Brandenburger and Barry J. Nalebuff, Co-opetition (Currency Doubleday, 1996).Reprint R0801ETo order, see the next pageor call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500 or go to www.hbr.org
harvard business review • january 2008	page 40
The Five Competitive Forces That Shape StrategyFurther Reading
To OrderFor Harvard Business Review reprints and subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500. Go to www.hbr.orgFor customized and quantity orders of Harvard Business Review article reprints, call 617-783-7626, or e-mai customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu
ARTICLEWhat Is Strategy?by Michael E. PorterHarvard Business ReviewFebruary 2000Product no. 4134By analyzing the five competitive forces, you uncover opportunities to position your com-pany strategically; that is, to gain a sustainable advantage over rivals by preserving what’s distinctive about your company. Your strategic position hinges on performing different activi-ties from competitors or performing similar activities, but in different ways. It emerges from three sources: 1) serving few needs of many customers (for example, Jiffy Lube pro-vides only auto lubricants), 2) serving broad needs of few customers (Bessemer Trust tar-gets only very high-wealth clients), or 3) serv-ing broad needs of many customers in a nar-row market (Carmike Cinemas operates only in cities with a population under 200,000).BOOKSRedefining Health Care: Creating Value-Based Competition on Resultsby Michael E. Porter andElizabeth Olmsted TeisbergHarvard Business School PressMay 2006Product no. 7782In this book Porter and Teisberg analyze the competitive forces responsible for the current crisis in U.S. health care. The authors argue that participants in the health care system have competed to shift costs, accumulate bar-gaining power, and restrict services rather than create value for patients. This zero-sum competition takes place at the wrong level— among health plans, networks, and hospi-tals—rather than where it matters most: in the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of spe-cific health conditions. Redefining Health Care lays out a breakthrough framework for rede-fining health care competition based on pa-tient value. With specific recommendations
for hospitals, doctors, health plans, employers, and policy makers, this book shows how to move to a positive-sum competition that will unleash stunning improvements in quality and efficiency.On Competitionby Michael E. PorterHarvard Business School Press September 1998 Product no. 7951Porter’s work, which began with his original formulation of the five forces, has defined our fundamental understanding of competition and competitive strategy. This book is a com-pilation of a dozen Porter articles: two new ar-ticles and ten of his articles from Harvard Busi-ness Review. Together, these essays provide a complete picture of Porter’s perspective on modern competition. Organized around three primary categories: Competition and Strategy: Core Concepts, The Competitiveness of Loca-tion, and Competitive Solutions to Societal Problems, these articles develop the building blocks that define competitive strategy.
page 41